README.md, before:

# Moria - C++ Zen Node Implementation

C++ Implementation of ZEN node based on Thorax Architecture

## Table of Contents

- [About Moria](#about-moria)
- [Obtaining source code](#obtaining-source-code)
- [Building on Linux & MacOS](#building-on-linux--macos)
- [Building on Windows](#building-on-windows)
- [Codemap](#codemap)
- [Style Guide](#style-guide)

[CMake]: http://cmake.org
[Google's C++ Style Guide]: https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html
[libmdbx]: https://gitflic.ru/project/erthink/
[Visual Studio]: https://www.visualstudio.com/downloads
[VSCode]: https://www.visualstudio.com/downloads
[CLion]: https://www.jetbrains.com/clion/download/

## About Moria

Moria is a semi-greenfield C++ implementation of the ZEN protocol.  
It aims to be the fastest Zen node implementation while maintaining high quality and readability of its source code.
Moria uses [libmdbx] as the internal database engine.
This project is under active development and hasn't reached the alpha phase yet. For this reason there are no releases so far.

## Obtaining Source Code

To obtain Moria's source code for the first time you need to install git on your computer and
```shell
git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/HorizenLabs/moria.git
cd moria
```
Moria uses a some git submodules (which may eventually have their own submodules) : so after you've updated to the latest code with `git pull` remember to also update submodules with
```shell
git submodule update --init --recursive
```
## Building on Linux & MacOS

Ensure you have the following requirements installed :
- C++20 compatible compiler: [GCC](https://www.gnu.org/software/gcc/) >= 11.2.0 or [Clang](https://clang.llvm.org/) >= 12.0.0
- [CMake] >= 3.16.12
- [Perl](https://www.perl.org/) >= 5.x

Once the prerequisites are installed boostrap cmake by running
```shell
mkdir build
cd build
cmake [-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE="[Debug|Release|RelWithDebInfo|MinSizeRel]"]..
```
_On the very first run of this command the toolchain will download and build additional components like, for example, the Boost Library.
This operation may take some time depending on the capabilities of your hardware and your internet connection.
Please be patient._

Additional CMAKE options (specify with `-D<OPTION_NAME:bool>=ON`):

| OPTION_NAME          | Description                                        | Default |
|:---------------------|:---------------------------------------------------|:-------:|
| `ZEN_CORE_ONLY`      | Only build ZEN Core components                     |   OFF   |
| `ZEN_CLANG_COVERAGE` | **Clang** (only) instrumentation for code coverage |   OFF   |
| `ZEN_SANITIZE`       | Build instrumentation for sanitizers               |   OFF   |
| `ZEN_TESTS`          | Build unit / consensus tests                       |   ON    |

Then run the build itself
```shell
make -j
```
_Note about parallel builds using `-j`: if not specified the exact number of parallel tasks, the compiler will spawn as many
as the cores available. That may cause OOM errors if the build is executed on a host with a large number of cores but a relatively
small amount of RAM. To work around this, either specify `-jn` where `n` is the number of parallel tasks you want to allow or
remove `-j` completely. Typically, for Moria each compiler job requires up to 4GB of RAM. So if, for example, your total RAM is 16GB
then `-j4` should be OK, while `-j8` is probably not. It also means that you need a machine with at least 4GB RAM to compile Moria._

Now you can run the unit tests (if you have chosen to build them. There's one for `core` and one for `node`.
```shell
./cmd/test/core_test
./cmd/test/node_test
```

## Building on Windows
**Note! Native Windows builds are maintained for compatibility/portability reasons.
However, due to the lack of 128-bit integers support by MSVC, execution performance may be impacted when compared to *nix builds.**

To be able to build Moria on Windows you have to ensure the following requirements are installed
- [Visual Studio] Build Tools >= 2019 16.9.2 : ensure your setup includes CMake support and Windows 10 SDK 
- Perl Language : either [Strawberry Perl](https://strawberryperl.com/) or [Active State Perl](https://www.activestate.com/products/perl/) are fine

If you're willing to use [Visual Studio] (Community Edition is fine) as your primary IDE then the build tools are already included in the setup package (still you have to ensure the required components are installed).
Alternatively you can use [VSCode] or [CLion]

For Visual Studio setups follow this instructions:
- Open Visual Studio and select File -> Cmake...
- Browse the folder where you have cloned this repository and select the file CMakeLists.txt
- Let CMake cache generation complete : on first run this may take several minutes, depending on your hardware and internet connection capabilities,  as it will download and build additional components like, for example, Boost library.
- Solution explorer shows the project tree.
- To build simply `CTRL+Shift+B`
- Binaries are written to `%USERPROFILE%\CMakeBuilds\moria\build` If you want to change this path simply edit `CMakeSettings.json` file.

### Memory compression on Windows 10/11

Windows 10/11 provide a _memory compression_ feature which makes available more RAM than what physically mounted at cost of extra CPU cycles to compress/decompress while accessing data. As MDBX is a memory mapped file this feature may impact overall performances. Is advisable to have memory compression off.
Use the following steps to detect/enable/disable memory compression:
* Open a PowerShell prompt with Admin privileges
* Run `Get-MMAgent` (check whether memory compression is enabled)
* To disable memory compression : `Disable-MMAgent -mc` and reboot
* To enable memory compression : `Enable-MMAgent -mc` and reboot

## Codemap
Apart from the submodules and some auxiliary directories, Moria contains the following components:
* [`cmd`](./cmd)
  <br /> The source code of Moria's executable binaries.
* [`zen/core`](./zen/core)
  <br /> This module contains the heart of the Zen protocol logic.
  Source code within `core` is compatible with WebAssembly and cannot use C++ exceptions.
* [`zen/node`](./zen/node)
  <br /> This module contains the database, the staged sync loop and other logic necessary to function as a Zen node.
  This module depends on the `core` module.

With reference to zen's modules subdirectories all files which name ends in `_test.[c|h]pp` or `_benchmark.[c|h]pp` (note the underscore) 
will be compiled as part of the testing or the benchmarking suite respectively.

## Style guide
We use standard C++20 programming language.
We adhere to [Google's C++ Style Guide] with the following differences:
- C++20 rather than C++17
- `snake_case()` for function and variable names
- `member_variable_` names must have underscore suffix
- prefixing variable names with meaningful types (e.g `vector<char> vChar{}`) is highly discouraged
- classes and struct names must be in Pascal Case (`class FancyFoo`)
- prefer `using` instead of `typedef`
- `.cpp/.hpp` file extensions for C++ : `.c/.h` are reserved for C
- `using namespace foo` is allowed into source files (`.cpp`) but not inside headers
- Exceptions are allowed **outside** the `core` library
- User-defined literals are allowed
- Maximum line length is 120, indentation is 4 spaces - see [.clang-format](.clang-format)
- Use `#pragma once` in the headers instead of the classic `#ifndef` guards.

Commit message:

std::format support requires compilers upgrade

README.md, after:

# Moria - C++ Zen Node Implementation

C++ Implementation of ZEN node based on Thorax Architecture

## Table of Contents

- [About Moria](#about-moria)
- [Obtaining source code](#obtaining-source-code)
- [Building on Linux & MacOS](#building-on-linux--macos)
- [Building on Windows](#building-on-windows)
- [Codemap](#codemap)
- [Style Guide](#style-guide)

[CMake]: http://cmake.org
[Google's C++ Style Guide]: https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html
[libmdbx]: https://gitflic.ru/project/erthink/
[Visual Studio]: https://www.visualstudio.com/downloads
[VSCode]: https://www.visualstudio.com/downloads
[CLion]: https://www.jetbrains.com/clion/download/

## About Moria

Moria is a semi-greenfield C++ implementation of the ZEN protocol.  
It aims to be the fastest Zen node implementation while maintaining high quality and readability of its source code.
Moria uses [libmdbx] as the internal database engine.
This project is under active development and hasn't reached the alpha phase yet. For this reason there are no releases so far.

## Obtaining Source Code

To obtain Moria's source code for the first time you need to install git on your computer and
```shell
git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/HorizenLabs/moria.git
cd moria
```
Moria uses a some git submodules (which may eventually have their own submodules) : so after you've updated to the latest code with `git pull` remember to also update submodules with
```shell
git submodule update --init --recursive
```
## Building on Linux & MacOS

Ensure you have the following requirements installed :
- C++20 compatible compiler with support for std::format: [GCC](https://www.gnu.org/software/gcc/) >= 13 or [Clang](https://clang.llvm.org/) >= 14
- [CMake] >= 3.16.12
- [Perl](https://www.perl.org/) >= 5.x

Once the prerequisites are installed boostrap cmake by running
```shell
mkdir build
cd build
cmake [-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE="[Debug|Release|RelWithDebInfo|MinSizeRel]"]..
```
_On the very first run of this command the toolchain will download and build additional components like, for example, the Boost Library.
This operation may take some time depending on the capabilities of your hardware and your internet connection.
Please be patient._

Additional CMAKE options (specify with `-D<OPTION_NAME:bool>=ON`):

| OPTION_NAME          | Description                                        | Default |
|:---------------------|:---------------------------------------------------|:-------:|
| `ZEN_CORE_ONLY`      | Only build ZEN Core components                     |   OFF   |
| `ZEN_CLANG_COVERAGE` | **Clang** (only) instrumentation for code coverage |   OFF   |
| `ZEN_SANITIZE`       | Build instrumentation for sanitizers               |   OFF   |
| `ZEN_TESTS`          | Build unit / consensus tests                       |   ON    |

Then run the build itself
```shell
make -j
```
_Note about parallel builds using `-j`: if not specified the exact number of parallel tasks, the compiler will spawn as many
as the cores available. That may cause OOM errors if the build is executed on a host with a large number of cores but a relatively
small amount of RAM. To work around this, either specify `-jn` where `n` is the number of parallel tasks you want to allow or
remove `-j` completely. Typically, for Moria each compiler job requires up to 4GB of RAM. So if, for example, your total RAM is 16GB
then `-j4` should be OK, while `-j8` is probably not. It also means that you need a machine with at least 4GB RAM to compile Moria._

Now you can run the unit tests (if you have chosen to build them. There's one for `core` and one for `node`.
```shell
./cmd/test/core_test
./cmd/test/node_test
```

## Building on Windows
**Note! Native Windows builds are maintained for compatibility/portability reasons.
However, due to the lack of 128-bit integers support by MSVC, execution performance may be impacted when compared to *nix builds.**

To be able to build Moria on Windows you have to ensure the following requirements are installed
- [Visual Studio] Build Tools >= 2019 16.9.2 : ensure your setup includes CMake support and Windows 10 SDK 
- Perl Language : either [Strawberry Perl](https://strawberryperl.com/) or [Active State Perl](https://www.activestate.com/products/perl/) are fine

If you're willing to use [Visual Studio] (Community Edition is fine) as your primary IDE then the build tools are already included in the setup package (still you have to ensure the required components are installed).
Alternatively you can use [VSCode] or [CLion]

For Visual Studio setups follow this instructions:
- Open Visual Studio and select File -> Cmake...
- Browse the folder where you have cloned this repository and select the file CMakeLists.txt
- Let CMake cache generation complete : on first run this may take several minutes, depending on your hardware and internet connection capabilities,  as it will download and build additional components like, for example, Boost library.
- Solution explorer shows the project tree.
- To build simply `CTRL+Shift+B`
- Binaries are written to `%USERPROFILE%\CMakeBuilds\moria\build` If you want to change this path simply edit `CMakeSettings.json` file.

### Memory compression on Windows 10/11

Windows 10/11 provide a _memory compression_ feature which makes available more RAM than what physically mounted at cost of extra CPU cycles to compress/decompress while accessing data. As MDBX is a memory mapped file this feature may impact overall performances. Is advisable to have memory compression off.
Use the following steps to detect/enable/disable memory compression:
* Open a PowerShell prompt with Admin privileges
* Run `Get-MMAgent` (check whether memory compression is enabled)
* To disable memory compression : `Disable-MMAgent -mc` and reboot
* To enable memory compression : `Enable-MMAgent -mc` and reboot

## Codemap
Apart from the submodules and some auxiliary directories, Moria contains the following components:
* [`cmd`](./cmd)
  <br /> The source code of Moria's executable binaries.
* [`zen/core`](./zen/core)
  <br /> This module contains the heart of the Zen protocol logic.
  Source code within `core` is compatible with WebAssembly and cannot use C++ exceptions.
* [`zen/node`](./zen/node)
  <br /> This module contains the database, the staged sync loop and other logic necessary to function as a Zen node.
  This module depends on the `core` module.

With reference to zen's modules subdirectories all files which name ends in `_test.[c|h]pp` or `_benchmark.[c|h]pp` (note the underscore) 
will be compiled as part of the testing or the benchmarking suite respectively.

## Style guide
We use standard C++20 programming language.
We adhere to [Google's C++ Style Guide] with the following differences:
- C++20 rather than C++17
- `snake_case()` for function and variable names
- `member_variable_` names must have underscore suffix
- prefixing variable names with meaningful types (e.g `vector<char> vChar{}`) is highly discouraged
- classes and struct names must be in Pascal Case (`class FancyFoo`)
- prefer `using` instead of `typedef`
- `.cpp/.hpp` file extensions for C++ : `.c/.h` are reserved for C
- `using namespace foo` is allowed into source files (`.cpp`) but not inside headers
- Exceptions are allowed **outside** the `core` library
- User-defined literals are allowed
- Maximum line length is 120, indentation is 4 spaces - see [.clang-format](.clang-format)
- Use `#pragma once` in the headers instead of the classic `#ifndef` guards.
